Following up with people is especially important. So how do you handle it when your client is offering to take your product, and you want to make sure they take it seriously? How do you replicate the quality? Lots of questions.
Let me first get a sense of the group here. How many of you run companies with fewer than 100 people? How many are between 100 and 1,000? And how many are more than a thousand? Okay, now I get a sense of where we are.
This workshop, I’ve been doing it since 2009, almost 15 years now. It was first set up for NASSCOM in 2009 when there was a feeling that we talk a lot about startups and early-stage companies, but we aren’t helping the people who are already in business grow. Figuring out how to get growth to happen was really the motivation behind it.
For the last year, I’ve been running a one-year program on this topic at the Gokhale Institute for Politics and Economics. We meet every month for about six hours, and I have a cohort of 27 companies going through the full year on how to scale their business. We also did a similar, shorter session with I-BOM and with the Desai School of Entrepreneurship, along with NASSCOM. We have about 25 companies in that network. So I have a lot of experience talking to companies that are in a certain orbit and trying to get to the next one.
A lot of this content has been built with a friend and colleague of mine, a gentleman named Ashok Korwar. Ashok isn’t here today because he has something else going on; otherwise, we usually do these together. But for 75 minutes, I said I can handle this, so that’s why I’m here.
I’m going to skip my intro because it’s already been discussed, but when you put a slide deck up, it’s useful to keep that portion in as well.
Here’s a theory we tell everyone: business growth is not linear. It’s not a straight line. Just because you’ve been in business longer doesn’t mean you’ll get to a certain size. Business growth happens in a sequence of S-curves. Let me explain what that looks like.
These shifts in orbit are something you see at every level of growth in a company. At Persistent, right now we are at about $300 million last quarter, so roughly a $1.2 billion company with 23,000 employees. I would say we are in the sixth orbit. But the transition from the first orbit to the second orbit, which is what I’m talking about today, is one of the hardest. This is where founders need to change their mindset from being the all-in-all for the business to someone who brings in a team and gets the whole team to work together. That’s really what we’re going to talk about.
One important thing to understand when moving from the first orbit to the second is that a lot of times we try to stretch the first orbit further. We’re at the top of the S-curve, we’ve reached the capabilities of the current business model, and we keep trying to stretch it. We say we’re going to extrapolate it further. Unfortunately, when you’re at the top of the S-curve, you don’t go up, you start going down.
There’s a very nice term for that point: the point of inflection. Andy Grove talks a lot about this in his book. At the point of inflection, you can either go up or go down, but only if you do something different. Otherwise, you’re destined to keep going down. You have to find your next S-curve.
What we’re going to talk about today is this: if you’re at that first blue point and you want to get to the point higher up on the next curve, what should you do? That’s the simple problem statement for today. I’m going to give you some ideas on how that happens.
Let me ask you another question. Let me go to the next point. These are just some numbers here, but let me do one thing, just move these chairs out and come in closer.
Some key resources or key individuals on your team start to leave, and every win stops feeling automatic. Growth is no longer incremental. You see some progress, but at the same time, you see attrition in your accounts. There’s an ongoing churn in the business.
At this point, a lot of people, especially founders, start to feel that this is getting too challenging. They think, I should create a new business line. Whatever I had to do with this one, I’ve reached the max. I need to do something different. The unfortunate part is that this may not be the right thing to do. You’re already short on management bandwidth, and creating another idea becomes very tricky.
Another characteristic of the top of the curve is that everyone becomes busy. Everyone feels busy all the time. Things are going on, everything seems chaotic, but there is no forward progress. There’s a lot of activity but no growth. You’ll see this situation often. And in these situations, there is a lot of gossip among employees. You hear all kinds of stories, which become very irritating when you’re running the business.
Finally, you see that when you hire new people, once they join, they don’t have anything to do. And the people already in the business are so busy that they have no time to train them. Everything seems busy and chaotic. These are all signals that you are at the top of the S-curve. Do any of these sound familiar? Do any of you have these in your business? Makes sense.
And when all this happens, the founders get stressed. That’s the outcome of all of this.
Should we also remove those tables? Should we remove them? I’m sorry, but this screen is actually doing a startup.
In your first orbit, your objective should be to get your first customer. Do whatever the customer tells you. It’s very simple: survive. By the time you’re in your second orbit, survival is not a challenge. You’re doing fine. You’re making whatever numbers, maybe 20 crores or so, but it’s not growing anymore. But you’re not dead. You have a plan, a product, a team, and a few hundred people working for you. That’s the situation.
The business strategy in the first orbit is to be responsive, respond to whatever comes your way. In the second orbit, you now have to focus. In the first orbit, you have the founding team, your band of followers, and maybe your dog. That’s pretty much how startups happen. By the time you reach this stage, you have a few hundred people in the business and are adding a few hundred more. You can’t just say, it’s me and whatever I feel like doing tomorrow. It’s now a professional team with executives and everything else that needs to come with it.
This transition becomes very tricky for founders. Someone asked earlier, how do you deal with people who are much older than you? Because now you’re starting to hire professionals and executives in the company. You may be an upstart, but the team now needs people who can run the business. How do you deal with that challenge?
Governance in the early stage is very basic. Now you have to institutionalize it. Processes that were ad hoc must now be defined and followed.
One last thing I’ll share is about boards. In the first orbit, your board consists of the founders. Now it’s time to bring in independent directors. Let me ask you, how many of you run businesses with independent board members? One person? Two? Three? A very small number. How many of you have board meetings at least four times a year? Even if you don’t have independent directors, you can still have formal board meetings. But this is the reality of how many small businesses run, in a very ad hoc way.
What I’m going to try to share with you is how to scale the business to a point where it feels like something is happening.
This is a famous Mario Andretti quote: “If everything seems under control, then you’re not really pushing.” When I talk to founders who want to get to the second orbit, they say, I’m so comfortable. I know everyone in the company. I know everything happening in the business. I know every transaction. I know all customers by first name. If I double or 10x the company, I’ll lose that. It’ll feel chaotic.
But when a company grows, this is bound to happen. If you’re not seeing chaos, you’re not pushing hard enough. So don’t worry too much if you feel restlessness among you and your colleagues.
Now, normally I have multiple sessions, and there are many topics I can discuss. Today I want to pick a few. I’ll cover “Visualize to Realize.” Then, if we have time, maybe something about positioning, theory of constraints, and then mentors and boards. I’m going to skip some parts and go fast because of the limited time. If you want more, you’ll have to come to my longer class.
Here’s the situation: you come to this class, and I tell you that you’re going to grow 10 times. You go back and tell your team, we’re going to grow 10 times. I heard Anand talking, and I’m excited. I’m going to 10x my business. Not 10x me. What will your team say? Are you crazy? We are at the top of the S-curve. We’ve been growing 5 percent, 10 percent, 15 percent year on year. If we have to 10x the business, the line is so long that we’ll never reach the other end. How is it going to happen?
People will think you’re crazy. You’ll see so much internal resistance. Everyone will tell you a hundred reasons why growth and scale are not possible at this point. You’ll get a lot of resistance.
How do you get around this?
The reality is that when people are looking at growth, you’re looking at something else. It’s a team effort. You need to take your team along. The team needs a mission to pursue. The power of a mission is incredible.
The most famous example is the “man on the moon.” John Kennedy, in ’61, said America would put a man on the moon and bring him back before the end of the decade. That was a huge galvanizing moment. Everybody said, I’m working for the mission of putting a man on the moon.
If you have a mission that is truly compelling, people can relate to it. Telling the company, I want 10x growth, and showing them a stretched spreadsheet won’t work.
You need to define where you want to be. Then you have a better chance of getting there.
One of the best examples I’ve found is an article by a guy named Brian Scudamore. It’s a four-minute video. I won’t play it now because of time, but he’s a Canadian from Vancouver who runs a company called 1-800-GOT-JUNK. It’s a traditional junk collection business. He explains how he created something called a “painted picture” of where he wanted to go.
So here’s what you have to do. You’ve decided that you want to scale. As part of scaling, you must choose what you want to do, who you want to do it with, and how you want to work together.
The painted picture helps you define that.
Let me explain. Let’s say you’re running a 10 crore business and you want to grow 10x and reach 100 crores.
Now you go to your team and say, I’m running a 10 crore business, we have about 100 people, and we want to grow to 100 crores. People will refuse, resist, and push back. It’s very hard for them to imagine what it takes to grow from 10 crores to 100 crores.
The way to approach this is not to discuss how to do it, or what next year or the next three years will look like. Instead, get your team together and imagine what your company would look like at 100 crores. Imagine the company at that scale. This is very important and very powerful. This is your painted picture.
You say, I’m running a business of 10 crores, this is my market, maybe the US or India. I want to grow 10x. What will the market look like when the business is 10x? Will I have 10 times the number of people, or fewer? How many managers will I need? How many customers? What kind of situation will a 100 crore business have?
Remember, I’m not asking you to figure out how to go from 10 to 100. I’m asking you to imagine what a 100 crore business looks like. Look at other 100 crore businesses and study how they operate. Create a story that says, this is what our 100 crore business will look like.
This exercise is what we call creating the painted picture. And it’s called a picture because it’s not just a document. It’s not a spreadsheet. It’s a poster or a story that your team can look at and feel, wow, this is where we’re going.
Your painted picture includes things like what the business looks like, where it will operate, how many customers it will have, what accomplishments it might celebrate, and so on. Most of the slides I’m referring to have links you can explore later, but let me focus on what we should actually do.
One model that relates to this is from the book Working Backwards, about how Amazon builds products. Before building a product, they write the press release for it. That’s the outcome they want, and then they work backwards.
Here, I suggest something similar. Imagine you’ve reached 100 crores and you’re on the cover of Business Today or any major business magazine. Someone has written an article about you and how you grew the company to 100 crores. They’re asking you questions. Create that article and circulate it in your company. This is where we’re going. This is our target. This is our version of “heaven.”
Another method, which is easy today, is to imagine yourself on CNBC being interviewed for 30 minutes after achieving this growth. You don’t need CNBC to do it. Just get a camera, sit with your co-founders or team, and have someone interview you. Ask yourself real questions: What did you do? Why did you believe this was possible? How did people respond? Answer those questions on camera. It becomes very compelling.
Once you have this, you can say, this is where I’m going. And the whole team starts to believe, this is why we’re doing what we’re doing.
Unless you have a purpose and a mission for where you are going and what the world will look like at that point, it is very difficult for the team to accept the idea of 10x growth. This process of visualizing your destination is a critical first step.
I’ll pause here to see if you follow the idea, because it’s very empowering. It’s not easy. You can’t just go home and draw it on a board. It takes time. And once you draw certain elements, you have to substantiate them. If you say, we’ll have a thousand people, and someone asks, where will they come from, you must be able to answer reasonably. You might say, we’re setting up two centers in these locations. All the doubts people have must be thought through and included in a complete story.
But don’t send the story as a spreadsheet. That’s not exciting. Create buzz around it. Create a video, a newspaper article, or a magazine-style writeup.
I’ll pause for questions.
You said don’t create a new product line. No, I didn’t say that. All I’m saying is imagine what your business will look like at scale. Let’s stay step by step. The question is whether you understand how to build this painted picture.
Does the painted picture have a timeline? Good question. In the beginning, when you’re creating it, no. You don’t know when you’ll reach it. That comes later. If you start by saying we will reach it in three years, people will freak out. It’s not important to define exactly when. You should have a sense, but you shouldn’t project more than four or five years out.
Growth will not be linear. It will be another S-curve. You’ll see some things change in year two, and then faster growth in year three and year four.
Someone asked whether the painted picture is related to manifestation. Not really. It’s imagination. It’s an aspirational vision you’re creating for your team.
Should you include everything, like the kind of team, managers, infrastructure? You should have a thought process on those things. A CNBC interview may not ask about those specifics, but your team will. Your team right now, struggling and stressed at the top of the first orbit, doesn’t necessarily believe you. They aren’t convinced you can do it. That doubt is real.
Bringing people together and saying this is where we’re going, this is what it will look like, gives them confidence that it can be achieved. And the easiest way to build that confidence is by looking at companies that have already done it. You aren’t the first company trying to get to 100 crores or 1,000 crores. Someone else has already done it. Go study them. How many people did they hire? How many managers did they need? Which geographies did they expand into?
This work takes about two to three months. It’s not an overnight task. But this process is incredibly empowering for you, your current team, and the new people you will hire.
Someone asked earlier: we’re at 50 crores. We told the team we want to go to 1,000 crores. After a few weeks, we felt it was too big. Should we go from 50 to 100, then 200, then 1,000? What should be the first number?
The point is that the equations you use in the first orbit and second orbit are different. If you set a target based on first-orbit thinking, it won’t be aspirational enough. And you won’t get the results you want. You need an uncomfortable target. If you’re doing 50 crores today, I would at least aim for 250. Five times. If you say 100, people think it’s too easy. That’s the reality.
What is the typical number of believers you need? At least half a dozen to a dozen.
Let me keep moving. You’ll get more chances to ask questions.
The first step in scaling your business is creating this painted picture of what your next orbit looks like. It’s important to do it this way instead of extrapolating from where you are at the top of the S-curve.
Let me move to the second thing. Many of you are not familiar with the theory of constraints. I find it a very useful strategy framework for small businesses. Simple to use. Many of the others are too complicated. Balanced scorecard and so on—all very complex.
Eliyahu Goldratt developed this. The most famous book is The Goal.
The concept is simple. If you're behind a cyclist on a winding road, even if you have a Ferrari, you can go only as fast as the slowest person in front of you. The slowest element determines the speed of the system.
In any system, according to Goldratt, there is one constraint holding you back. If you identify that constraint and resolve it, you get growth.
Same idea with a chain. The weakest link determines the strength of the chain. If you find the weakest link, strengthen it, and you gain strength.
Most businesses in this stage—10 crores trying to reach 100 crores—have one key constraint holding them back. If you identify that one thing, growth becomes much easier.
Every system has one bottleneck. The key is to find it. Your constraint depends on your business model, but if you’ve been running the company for five, seven, ten years, you already have a good sense of what the constraint is. You might list four or five constraints, but Goldratt says: choose one.
Two ways to do this. One: do a thought experiment. If you are at 10 crores and want to reach 50, what is the one thing holding you back? If you fixed that one thing, you should see immediate growth. It might be weak sales. It might be lack of money. It might be that you don’t have a strong product. Something simple can be the constraint.
Identifying the constraint is the key.
A constraint is also a leverage point. If you know what’s holding you back and how to get past it, you unlock growth.
There are different types of constraints. First are external constraints, which the market determines. For example, Google with 90 percent search market share cannot meaningfully increase share. That’s an external constraint. If you say, I cannot grow because there is no market, that’s typically not true for most of us here.
Another external constraint could be government regulation shutting your business down. These things are outside your control.
If it’s not external, it’s internal. Internal constraints are within your control.
A bonsai tree is a good example. The tree could grow, but you constrain its growth by trimming its roots. That’s an internal constraint.
Within internal constraints, one of the biggest is mindset. The Chief Minister mentioned this earlier. You’ve all heard the story of the elephant tied to a small rope. He doesn’t move because he believes he can’t. That’s mindset constraint.
And one other story on this is that people say things like, I’m not Shah Jahan, so how could I build a Taj Mahal. This isn’t possible because I’m so and so. Ashoke says it in his own way. He says, I’m a Marathi guy, how can I run a business. His wife is Gujarati, so she told him, what do you mean by that, everyone runs a business in Gujarat, who are you to say you can’t. Everyone has these kinds of constraints.
A policy constraint is another type. Take Bhishma from the Mahabharata. He created so many constraints for himself. There was no reason for the Mahabharata war to happen. If Bhishma had become king, he was the most powerful and everyone would have accepted him. He would have ruled Hastinapur and we wouldn’t have had that entire situation. But he decided, I will not marry, I will not have children, I will not claim the throne. Companies do similar things. We say, I’ll only hire people from this background, or every project must have a certain margin, or I cannot pay someone more than I pay myself. These constraints hold us back.
Another common constraint is keeping people busy all the time. If you keep them busy, they aren’t polishing their skills. They may be doing work that isn’t relevant, or work that creates more work for others, just for the sake of staying busy. Sometimes you need to tell them, stay out, let me finish this, then you can come back. These constraints exist everywhere.
Once I find the constraint, what do I do. The constraint becomes a lever. You go back and fix it. Goldratt gives five principles for addressing constraints. First, identify the constraint. Second, squeeze the most out of it. If sales is your constraint, make everyone in the company contribute to sales. Send everyone to sales because you already have those people. Why not test whether more people can sell.
In the book The Goal, he gives this example. He was taking a group of Scouts, ages eight to sixteen, on a trek on a hot day. They had backpacks and they needed to stay together as a batch of twenty. He realized the younger kids had bigger bags and were slowing things down, while the bigger kids were going too fast and getting restless. What should you do. He took the bags from the smaller kids and gave them to the older boys. That slowed the older boys down, the younger ones moved faster, and the whole system moved faster. So it’s not always necessary to make the fastest part go faster. Sometimes slowing certain parts improves throughput.
Then you elevate the capability of the constraint. Once you finish that, you pause and ask what the next constraint is.
This is a quick overview of the theory of constraints. Let’s take a short pause and take a question or two. How many minutes are we in now, how much time do we have. Forty-five minutes. We’ve done forty-five. People want more time, so don’t worry, carry on. It’s very warm in the room, so let’s all stand up for a moment, stretch, and then we’ll continue. Some water might help too.
He came in for the show and said something interesting. He said, I’m the best magician at my price point. In Las Vegas you can pay any amount for a magician. But if this is what you want to pay, then I’m the best at that price point. That’s the idea. Even if I’m a 10 crore company, I should define my business in such a way that I can be a leader. To be a leader in the market, the market can’t be too big. If the market is too large, I don’t know who the competitors are, and nobody will know me.
Unfortunately, the VC and funding community gets crazy about needing a billion-dollar market. If I’m a 10 crore company and the market is a billion dollars, nobody will come to me. Nobody even knows I exist. How do I build a market that big. So how large should the market be. It should be at least five times your aspirational size, but not much more than that.
If you already have 50 percent market share, you have no room for growth. That’s why the target is 20 percent, not 50 percent. You don’t want to be stuck with no room to grow. If you already have 50 percent, you have to find a bigger market or look for adjacencies.
Let me share the Persistent story from 2001. At that time we were about 10 to 15 crores. This was just after Y2K. Y2K ended, the bubble burst, and suddenly everyone was talking about outsourcing. India got a lot of attention because of Y2K. People believed Y2K outsourcing would die, but in reality, more outsourcing happened afterwards. Everyone was selling into every space.
I was running a small business and I thought, if I compete with TCS and Satyam, who were already much larger, and say I am also doing IT outsourcing, nobody will come to me. Why would anyone choose me. So we decided not to call ourselves IT outsourcing. We defined product outsourcing. We created a category around product outsourcing. We said we are not IT outsourcing, we are product outsourcing.
What is the difference. We defined it this way. In an IT project, you have fixed requirements and you trade off between time and money. In a product, the first thing you decide is when you want to ship, then you decide how much you want to spend, and you build the best product within that time. When you present this to product companies, they get it immediately. You can ask them, how many people do you hire from IT services companies. They’ll say none, we hire from product companies. There’s a whole ecosystem that aligns with that.
So we created differentiated positioning. Now interestingly, TCS and HCL were doing far more product outsourcing than us, even then. But they never wanted to position themselves as pure product outsourcing companies because they had huge IT markets. If they claimed to be niche product players, they would lose the big market. So by constraining the market and defining leadership, we got good returns from that positioning.
Let me give you a few more examples. Ashoke was consulting for Polaris. Same story. They were doing all kinds of random work. By 2000 they realized they should focus on banking. Once they did that, their business grew phenomenally.
This does mean a kind of specialization. I’ll give you two examples.
In one of the Pune classes, there was a travel agency owner. Travel agencies are commoditized. You compete with other agencies and with online portals. Margins are thin. He attended the class and I told him he needed leadership in a niche. He looked at his portfolio and found one project where he worked with a US university running an India study abroad program. He realized this could be a niche. He created a full package for universities bringing students to India. So instead of serving everyone who travels, he was now selling to maybe a thousand universities in the US. He knew exactly who they were. For each one, he offered complete service: travel booking, hotels, guides, itineraries. If I go to a US university and give them a full service offering, margins change dramatically. It becomes a completely different business.
Another example is from a Delhi class. One person said he did open source software. I told him open source is too broad. Specialize. He said he worked on Drupal. I said Drupal is good, focus on Drupal. If you're doing Drupal, you need to be active in the Drupal community. Answer questions, contribute code. If someone needs a Drupal expert, they’ll check the community boards to see who contributes. If your people are seen there, clients come to you. Establishing a brand becomes much easier when you’re in a niche. Competing against big companies also becomes easier because you’re the specialist. Everyone says they do Drupal, but only a few commit code. If a big company says they compete with you, the client still comes back to you because you’re the expert.
Here’s another example from Pune. In Pune politics, Chhagan Bhujbal had a strategy. He didn’t fight his opponents everywhere. He brought them into his territory and controlled his turf. The whole strategy was differentiation and leadership. In my world, you don’t mess with me.
There are many such examples. A good book to read on this is Harsh Realities by Harsh Mariwala, the founder of Marico. He writes about how he fended off Unilever in the oil business. He knew the market better, knew every buyer, and built leadership in a defined segment.
Another consumer example. Amazon, Facebook, and Apple all started with tightly defined products before expanding. Apple focused on designers and desktop publishing. Facebook was for Harvard students. You start with a niche and leadership, then expand.
Some Indian brands have done the same. Paper Boat is a great example. Competing with Pepsi and Coke is impossible. So they differentiated. They used different packaging, nostalgic flavors, and targeted a specific audience. Their initial distribution wasn’t through distributors. They targeted Indigo Airlines first. If Indigo pushes your product, passengers notice it, like it, and later ask for it in stores. That’s how Paper Boat created its niche and leadership.
Let me skip to the summary. It helps to catch a wave. Imagine the market as a buffalo, and you as a fly on it. You can get shaken off anytime. Your strategy is to find a buffalo going in the right direction and ride it. A 10 or 20 crore company cannot create a new market. It’s too expensive. You have to ride a wave. Once you’re big enough, then you can shape the market. But in the beginning, you must constrain the market. Differentiation and leadership give you premium value and pull business toward you. This is important. If there’s one lesson to take back, it’s this.
Because I'm the one who knows how to do it. As a small business, having a very differentiated position actually helps a lot. Since I’m from Pune, I’ll give a Pune example. In Pune, Chhagan Bhujbal is the key figure. His strategy was that he didn’t go fight the MLAs on their turf. He brought them onto his turf. He said, I’m not going to fight everywhere. You come to my ground and I’ll take care of you. The entire strategy was about creating differentiation and leadership. In my world, you’re not going to mess with me.
These are interesting examples of what this can look like. If you want to read a good book about this, read the Marico book. It’s called Harsh Realities, written by Harsh Mariwala. He explains how he fended off Unilever in the oil business. He’s the Parachute King. He writes about how he competed against huge brands with all the money and MBA talent, yet succeeded because he knew the market well. He knew every buyer.
Here’s another consumer example. Amazon, Facebook, and Apple all started with a very specific product before expanding. Apple built for designers and desktop publishers. Macintosh became popular with artists. Facebook started with Harvard students. You have to find your niche.
Some Indian brands have done this too. They created strong brands by starting small and specialized, establishing leadership in that niche rather than trying to be one-of-many. Take FirstCry. Yes, you can buy children’s clothes on Amazon. But leadership in that category belongs to specialized players.
Paper Boat is one of the most interesting models. Competing with Pepsi and Coke is impossible. They sell black or white liquid at massive scale. Paper Boat said, if we create another cola, who will buy from us. They made it different. They packaged it differently, made nostalgic Indian flavors, and targeted a specific audience. For their first marketing strategy, they didn’t go to distributors. They went to Indigo Airlines. If you convince Indigo, your drink is on every flight. Passengers try it, like it, and then look for it elsewhere. This was a differentiated way to enter the market.
They targeted people in their 40s to 60s. Their flavors evoked childhood memories. They knew exactly who their market was. Today they sell everywhere, but they didn’t start that way.
Here’s the summary. It helps to catch a wave. Imagine the market as a buffalo, and you are the fly sitting on it. You can get shaken off anytime. Your strategy is to find a buffalo going in the right direction and ride it. Your strategy is not to create a new market. A 10 crore or 20 crore company cannot create a new market. It’s too expensive. You have to ride a wave. Once you become big enough, you can eat the buffalo. But in the beginning, you’re too small to define a new market. Creating markets costs too much. You must constrain the market.
Differentiation and leadership are the key. Leadership gives you premium value. It creates excitement. It’s much more fun when business comes to you, instead of chasing every deal. This is extremely important. If you take one lesson back today, it’s this.
I’ll take a short pause for questions and a time check. Then we’ll decide whether to cover one more topic.
Thank you. My question about leadership—isn’t that a first orbit story. No. In the first orbit, you do what the customer tells you to do. There’s no leadership. You’re responding. You’re just starting. You don’t know what works yet. By the time you’re in the second orbit, you’ve tested things. Some customer is happy with your work. Now you establish leadership. In the first orbit, you respond. In the second orbit, you build and claim leadership.
Someone asked about USP. Yes, you need a USP. But USP alone doesn’t create leadership. You may have a unique product, but that doesn’t make you the leader. After defining ourselves as a product company, we still found the market too large. So we focused on product companies working in the data layer. That’s where I could be a leader. USP is part of leadership, but leadership is the bigger idea.
When buyers choose a product or service, they look for leaders. If a small company comes in, the buyer asks, who competes with you. If TCS says Persistent competes with them, they will call me immediately. USP is important, but leadership is more important.
People also say, if you have two rabbits to catch, what do you do. You catch one first. You can’t catch both at the same time. This is targeted to small companies. I’m not talking about GE or any large enterprise. If you’re in the middle of two rabbits, you still have to choose. You take a call. It’s like The Goal. You choose one. You can’t chase both. Yes, it’s a chance. You might miss a few. But you can’t catch both.
Let me cover one more important point.
Entrepreneurship can be lonely. You need a team to climb the mountain, but you need a mountain first. If you don’t have a mountain, the team doesn’t know where to climb. Showing the mountain is what we started with in the painted picture.
There’s a book called Beyond the Summit. It’s about mountains, but I won’t go into detail. I want to cover what I consider the second most important thing for businesses at this stage.
When you run your own business, it’s your business. You are the center. Everyone looks to you. Everyone works for you. But by the time you get to the second orbit, you need to transform the business from my business to our business.
For me, this happened in 1997–98. We were a small company of 25 to 30 people. We were profitable and doing cool work. We would even say no to work because we didn’t want too much. During an offsite, one of the team members said, the way we run things, we decide whether to grow or not based on what you want—your personal preference. He said, what you want may not be what I want right now. That question was very important.
It takes a lot of work for the founder to make this shift. I’ve come to the conclusion that companies don’t grow from one level to the next because the founder is not willing to make it our company. It remains my company. This affects culture and determines whether people want to work with you. Team building is anchored on this point. Is it my company or our company.
Let me show the architecture. In a typical first-orbit setup, the founder employs everyone. Everyone works for the founder. The founder owns the company. The founder has the mission. This is real. I asked one group what questions they wanted answered in a team-building session. They asked, how can I get the team to align with my mission, how do I get them to work for what I want. Nobody should be working for your mission. People work for our mission.
You need to shift to a model where there is a company. People work for the company. You also work for the company. You may own shares, but the mission belongs to the company, not to you.
This transition took me a year. When it happened, everything changed.
Before that, I was still writing code. I’m a programmer by training. I like coding. I was writing code that we shipped. And when the CEO writes code, it becomes awkward for everyone. I was coding at night and constantly busy.
When we made the shift to our company, we realized the biggest constraint was sales. We didn’t have enough salespeople. If sales is the constraint and I’m the CEO, then I should focus on sales. So I said, fine, I’ll become the sales guy. It was the best decision I made. I recommend that everyone become a salesperson at least once. It helped the company in many ways.
I stopped coding, not because I wasn’t good, but because others could do it. In sales, there was nobody else.
When you are the CEO, and you separate ownership from management, the idea is that you are the CEO as long as you are the best person to serve the company’s growth. The company needs to grow, whether you like the role or not. Your growth is different from the company’s growth. If you can’t grow the company, you shouldn’t be CEO. That choice is yours. Ownership and management are two different things.
We’re now running more sessions like these at IIT Bombay and elsewhere, two to three days, six hours a day. There is so much content. I’m also trying to build a community so everyone can help each other. The reality is everyone has the same challenges. People feel unique, but problems are similar across industries.
What you do for a startup is different from what you do at this stage. Every stage has its own playbook. I’m focused only on this second orbit transition.
Thank you very much. I’ll request you to stay back for a moment. To felicitate Dr. DP with a small token of appreciation, I’d like to invite Punit Verma, CEO and founder of Srain Tech. I attended his master class in Pune a year and a half ago, and I’ve been after him since then to come to J and conduct a class. I believe you are happy with this. We have another session to go. Thank you.